DEPLOYMENT.md, before:

# Tree Risk Pro Dashboard - Deployment Guide (v0.2.0)

This guide provides instructions for deploying the Tree Risk Pro Dashboard on our Google Cloud Platform (GCP) instance.

## Deployment Summary

Our production server is deployed at: **https://34.125.120.78/**

**Current access credentials:**
- Username: `TestAdmin`
- Password: `trp345!`

## v0.2.0 Release Highlights

v0.2.0 includes these key improvements:
- UI refinements in header and sidebar navigation
- Renamed "Save to Database" to "Save for Review" for clarity
- Fixed 3D map state preservation between views
- Added visual separator lines in sidebars
- Added thorough code documentation
- Improved backend security
- Streamlined GCP deployment process

## Prerequisites

- Ubuntu 22.04 LTS VM with at least 2 vCPU, 4 GB memory
- Python 3.12+ and pip
- Node.js 18+
- Git
- Nginx

## Required API Keys

**IMPORTANT: You must obtain these API keys before deployment:**

1. **Google Maps API Key**: 
   - Go to https://console.cloud.google.com/
   - Navigate to Google Maps Platform > Credentials
   - Create an API key with Maps JavaScript API access

2. **Google Maps Map ID**:
   - Go to Google Maps Platform > Map Management
   - Create a new Map ID (or use existing one: e2f2ee8160dbcea0)

3. **Gemini API Key**:
   - Go to https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey
   - Create a new API key for Gemini model access
   - Ensure your account has access to gemini-2.0-flash model

## Deployment Process

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/tree-risk-pro.git ~/tree-risk-pro
cd ~/tree-risk-pro
```

### 2. Configure Environment

Create environment files with your API keys:

```bash
# Frontend environment (.env)
cat > .env << EOF
# Important: Empty string is intentional to avoid path duplication
VITE_API_URL=
VITE_GOOGLE_MAPS_API_KEY=your_google_maps_api_key
VITE_GOOGLE_MAPS_MAP_ID=your_map_id
EOF

# Backend environment (backend/.env)
cat > tree_risk_pro/dashboard/backend/.env << EOF
APP_MODE=production
SKIP_AUTH=false
DASHBOARD_USERNAME=TestAdmin
DASHBOARD_PASSWORD=trp345!
GEMINI_API_KEY=your_gemini_api_key
GEMINI_MODEL=gemini-2.0-flash
EOF
```

**IMPORTANT**: Replace the placeholder values with your actual API keys before proceeding:
- `your_google_maps_api_key` with your Google Maps API key
- `your_map_id` with your Google Maps Map ID
- `your_gemini_api_key` with your Gemini API key

Alternatively, you can use our setup script with production flag:

```bash
./scripts/setup.sh -d -p your-server-ip
# Then edit both .env files to update API keys
```

### 3. Build Frontend

```bash
# Install dependencies and build
cd tree_risk_pro/dashboard
npm install
npm run build
```

### 4. Setup Deployment Directory

```bash
# Create directory structure
sudo mkdir -p /opt/dashboard/{backend,dist}
sudo mkdir -p /opt/dashboard/backend/{logs,data/temp,data/zarr,data/reports,data/exports}

# Copy files
sudo cp -r dist/* /opt/dashboard/dist/
sudo cp -r backend/* /opt/dashboard/backend/
sudo cp ../../pyproject.toml /opt/dashboard/backend/
sudo cp .env /opt/dashboard/
sudo cp backend/.env /opt/dashboard/backend/

# Set permissions
sudo chmod -R 755 /opt/dashboard/backend/logs
sudo chmod -R 755 /opt/dashboard/backend/data
```

### 5. Install Backend Dependencies

```bash
cd /opt/dashboard/backend
sudo pip install poetry
sudo poetry install

# Extend config.py to include environment variables for Gemini
sudo tee -a /opt/dashboard/backend/config.py > /dev/null << EOF

# Gemini Configuration
GEMINI_API_KEY = os.environ.get('GEMINI_API_KEY', '')
GEMINI_MODEL = os.environ.get('GEMINI_MODEL', 'gemini-2.0-flash')
EOF
```

### 6. Configure Nginx

```bash
# Generate self-signed certificate if needed
sudo mkdir -p /etc/ssl/private
sudo openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 365 -newkey rsa:2048 \
    -keyout /etc/ssl/private/dashboard-selfsigned.key \
    -out /etc/ssl/certs/dashboard-selfsigned.crt \
    -subj "/C=US/ST=State/L=City/O=Organization/CN=your-server-ip"

# Create Nginx configuration
sudo tee /etc/nginx/sites-available/dashboard.conf > /dev/null << EOF
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name _;
    
    # Redirect all HTTP traffic to HTTPS
    return 301 https://\$host\$request_uri;
}

server {
    listen 443 ssl;
    server_name _;
    
    # SSL configuration
    ssl_certificate /etc/ssl/certs/dashboard-selfsigned.crt;
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/ssl/private/dashboard-selfsigned.key;
    
    # Frontend static files
    location / {
        root /opt/dashboard/dist;
        try_files \$uri \$uri/ /index.html;

        # Add cache control for static assets
        location /assets {
            expires 7d;
            add_header Cache-Control "public, max-age=604800";
        }
    }

    # Backend API
    location /api {
        proxy_pass http://localhost:5000;
        proxy_set_header Host \$host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP \$remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For \$proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto \$scheme;
        proxy_read_timeout 90;
    }
}
EOF

# Replace "your-server-ip" with your actual server IP in the Nginx config
sudo sed -i "s/your-server-ip/$(curl -s ifconfig.me)/g" /etc/nginx/sites-available/dashboard.conf

sudo ln -sf /etc/nginx/sites-available/dashboard.conf /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/
sudo rm -f /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/default
sudo nginx -t
sudo systemctl restart nginx
```

### 7. Create Systemd Service

```bash
# First find the exact path to gunicorn in the Poetry environment
cd /opt/dashboard/backend
GUNICORN_PATH=$(sudo poetry env info --path)
echo "Poetry virtualenv path: $GUNICORN_PATH"

# Create the systemd service file with the FULL PATH to gunicorn
sudo tee /etc/systemd/system/dashboard-backend.service > /dev/null << EOF
[Unit]
Description=Tree Risk Pro Dashboard Backend
After=network.target

[Service]
User=root
WorkingDirectory=/opt/dashboard/backend
ExecStart=$GUNICORN_PATH/bin/gunicorn -w 4 -b 127.0.0.1:5000 app:app
Environment="DASHBOARD_USERNAME=TestAdmin"
Environment="DASHBOARD_PASSWORD=trp345!"
Environment="APP_MODE=production" 
Environment="GEMINI_API_KEY=$(grep GEMINI_API_KEY /opt/dashboard/backend/.env | cut -d= -f2)"
Environment="GEMINI_MODEL=$(grep GEMINI_MODEL /opt/dashboard/backend/.env | cut -d= -f2)"
Restart=always

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
EOF

sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl restart dashboard-backend
```

### 8. Verify Deployment

```bash
# Check backend status
sudo systemctl status dashboard-backend

# Verify API is running
curl -u TestAdmin:trp345! http://localhost:5000/api/config

# Verify the HTTPS site is working (ignore self-signed certificate warning)
curl https://$(curl -s ifconfig.me)/api/config -k
```

After completing these steps, your Tree Risk Pro Dashboard should be accessible via HTTPS at your server's IP address.

## Troubleshooting

### CORS or API Connection Issues

If you see CORS errors or API connection problems:

1. **Check your API_BASE_URL in the frontend**:
   
   The key issue with this deployment is ensuring the frontend doesn't try to connect directly to `http://localhost:5000`. 
   
   In the source code:
   ```javascript
   // src/services/api/apiService.js
   const API_BASE_URL = import.meta.env.VITE_API_URL || 'http://localhost:5000';
   ```

   This is why we set `VITE_API_URL=` (empty string) in the .env file. When built with an empty string, API calls become relative paths (e.g., `/api/config`) that work correctly with the Nginx proxy.

2. **Verify built JavaScript doesn't contain localhost references**:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/dashboard/dist
   grep -r "localhost:5000" --include="*.js" .
   ```

3. **Check browser console for the actual URL being used**:
   - If you see `API_BASE_URL: http://localhost:5000`, the frontend was built with the wrong environment settings
   - If you see `API_BASE_URL: /api/api`, there's a path duplication issue

4. **Check Nginx logs for proxy errors**:
   ```bash
   sudo tail -f /var/log/nginx/error.log
   ```

### Backend Service Issues

If the backend service fails to start:

1. **Poetry path issues**:
   - Find the correct path to the virtualenv: `sudo poetry env info --path`
   - Use the exact path to gunicorn in the systemd service file

2. **Missing Gemini API configuration**:
   - Confirm config.py has been updated with Gemini environment variables
   - Check backend logs: `sudo journalctl -u dashboard-backend -e`

3. **Run backend manually to debug**:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/dashboard/backend
   sudo poetry run python app.py
   ```

### Missing Google Maps Components

If you see the error: "The map is initialized without a valid Map ID, which will prevent use of Advanced Markers":

1. **Get a valid Map ID from Google Cloud Console**:
   - Go to the [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)
   - Navigate to Google Maps Platform > Map Management
   - Create a new Map ID or use an existing one

2. **Make sure .env contains the correct Map ID**:
   ```
   VITE_GOOGLE_MAPS_MAP_ID=your_map_id
   ```

3. **Rebuild the frontend** after updating the environment variables

## Service Management for v0.2.0

### Monitoring Logs

```bash
# Backend Flask logs
sudo journalctl -u dashboard-backend.service -f
tail -f /opt/dashboard/backend/logs/app.log

# Tree detection logs (job-specific)
ls -la /opt/dashboard/backend/logs/tree_detection_*
cat /opt/dashboard/backend/logs/tree_detection_<timestamp>.log

# Nginx logs
sudo tail -f /var/log/nginx/access.log
sudo tail -f /var/log/nginx/error.log
```

### Managing Services

```bash
# Backend service management
sudo systemctl status dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl restart dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl stop dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl start dashboard-backend

# Nginx service management
sudo systemctl status nginx
sudo systemctl restart nginx

# Check current CPU and memory usage
top -u $(whoami)

# Monitor disk space
df -h /opt/dashboard
```

### Backup and Restore

```bash
# Backup the entire application
sudo tar -czf /tmp/dashboard-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz /opt/dashboard

# Backup just the data directories
sudo tar -czf /tmp/dashboard-data-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz /opt/dashboard/backend/data

# Restore from backup
sudo tar -xzf /tmp/dashboard-backup-20250426.tar.gz -C /
sudo systemctl restart dashboard-backend
```

## Security Checklist

1. **Authentication**:
   - Update the default credentials after deployment
   - Use a strong password (12+ characters with mixed case, numbers, symbols)
   - Current auth implementation is suitable for beta testing

2. **SSL/TLS**:
   - Our deployment script sets up a self-signed certificate by default
   - Current setup on 34.125.120.78 uses this self-signed certificate
   - For domain-based deployment, use Let's Encrypt:
     ```bash
     sudo systemctl status certbot.timer  # Check auto-renewal status
     ```

3. **Firewall**:
   - Our server has these ports open:
     ```bash
     sudo ufw status  # Should show only 22, 80, 443
     ```

4. **Updates**:
   - Update system packages monthly:
     ```bash
     sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
     ```
   - Check for outdated dependencies:
     ```bash
     cd /opt/dashboard && npm outdated
     cd /opt/dashboard/backend && source venv/bin/activate && pip list --outdated
     ```

5. **API Security**:
   - Keep API keys secure
   - Our Gemini API key is restricted to the production VM
   - Do not commit credentials to git

6. **Gemini API Usage**:
   - Monitor usage at https://console.cloud.google.com
   - Current quota: 60 requests/minute
   - Current billing: Pay-as-you-go with monthly budget alert

Commit message:

docs: consolidate documentation files at root level and remove duplicates

DEPLOYMENT.md, after:

# Tree Risk Pro - Deployment Guide (v0.2.1)

> This is the master deployment guide for the entire Tree Risk Pro project.
> For component-specific deployment guides, see:
> - [Dashboard Deployment Guide](/tree_risk_pro/dashboard/DEPLOYMENT.md)

This guide provides instructions for deploying the Tree Risk Pro system on our Google Cloud Platform (GCP) instance.

## Deployment Summary

Our production server is deployed at: **https://34.125.120.78/**

**Current access credentials:**
- Username: `TestAdmin`
- Password: `trp345!`

## v0.2.1 Release Deployment Notes

v0.2.1 includes these key improvements requiring deployment attention:
- S2 geospatial indexing with Zarr store integration
- New API endpoints for S2 cell-based report management
- ML overlay with persistent opacity settings
- Enhanced DOM handling requiring proper browser caching settings
- Fixed Components/Detection sidebar functionality
- Performance improvements for transitions between modes
- Improved backend security
- Streamlined GCP deployment process

## Prerequisites

- Ubuntu 22.04 LTS VM with at least 2 vCPU, 4 GB memory
- Python 3.12+ and pip
- Node.js 18+
- Git
- Nginx

## Required API Keys

**IMPORTANT: You must obtain these API keys before deployment:**

1. **Google Maps API Key**: 
   - Go to https://console.cloud.google.com/
   - Navigate to Google Maps Platform > Credentials
   - Create an API key with Maps JavaScript API access

2. **Google Maps Map ID**:
   - Go to Google Maps Platform > Map Management
   - Create a new Map ID (or use existing one: e2f2ee8160dbcea0)

3. **Gemini API Key**:
   - Go to https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey
   - Create a new API key for Gemini model access
   - Ensure your account has access to gemini-2.0-flash model

## Deployment Process

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/tree-risk-pro.git ~/tree-risk-pro
cd ~/tree-risk-pro
```

### 2. Configure Environment

Create environment files with your API keys:

```bash
# Frontend environment (.env)
cat > .env << EOF
# Important: Empty string is intentional to avoid path duplication
VITE_API_URL=
VITE_GOOGLE_MAPS_API_KEY=your_google_maps_api_key
VITE_GOOGLE_MAPS_MAP_ID=your_map_id
EOF

# Backend environment (backend/.env)
cat > tree_risk_pro/dashboard/backend/.env << EOF
APP_MODE=production
SKIP_AUTH=false
DASHBOARD_USERNAME=TestAdmin
DASHBOARD_PASSWORD=trp345!
GEMINI_API_KEY=your_gemini_api_key
GEMINI_MODEL=gemini-2.0-flash
EOF
```

**IMPORTANT**: Replace the placeholder values with your actual API keys before proceeding:
- `your_google_maps_api_key` with your Google Maps API key
- `your_map_id` with your Google Maps Map ID
- `your_gemini_api_key` with your Gemini API key

Alternatively, you can use our setup script with production flag:

```bash
./scripts/setup.sh -d -p your-server-ip
# Then edit both .env files to update API keys
```

### 3. Build Frontend

```bash
# Install dependencies and build
cd tree_risk_pro/dashboard
npm install
npm run build
```

### 4. Setup Deployment Directory

```bash
# Create directory structure
sudo mkdir -p /opt/dashboard/{backend,dist}
sudo mkdir -p /opt/dashboard/backend/{logs,data/temp,data/zarr,data/reports,data/exports}

# Copy files
sudo cp -r dist/* /opt/dashboard/dist/
sudo cp -r backend/* /opt/dashboard/backend/
sudo cp ../../pyproject.toml /opt/dashboard/backend/
sudo cp .env /opt/dashboard/
sudo cp backend/.env /opt/dashboard/backend/

# Set permissions
sudo chmod -R 755 /opt/dashboard/backend/logs
sudo chmod -R 755 /opt/dashboard/backend/data
```

### 5. Install Backend Dependencies

```bash
cd /opt/dashboard/backend
sudo pip install poetry
sudo poetry install

# Extend config.py to include environment variables for Gemini
sudo tee -a /opt/dashboard/backend/config.py > /dev/null << EOF

# Gemini Configuration
GEMINI_API_KEY = os.environ.get('GEMINI_API_KEY', '')
GEMINI_MODEL = os.environ.get('GEMINI_MODEL', 'gemini-2.0-flash')
EOF
```

### 6. Configure Nginx

```bash
# Generate self-signed certificate if needed
sudo mkdir -p /etc/ssl/private
sudo openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 365 -newkey rsa:2048 \
    -keyout /etc/ssl/private/dashboard-selfsigned.key \
    -out /etc/ssl/certs/dashboard-selfsigned.crt \
    -subj "/C=US/ST=State/L=City/O=Organization/CN=your-server-ip"

# Create Nginx configuration
sudo tee /etc/nginx/sites-available/dashboard.conf > /dev/null << EOF
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name _;
    
    # Redirect all HTTP traffic to HTTPS
    return 301 https://\$host\$request_uri;
}

server {
    listen 443 ssl;
    server_name _;
    
    # SSL configuration
    ssl_certificate /etc/ssl/certs/dashboard-selfsigned.crt;
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/ssl/private/dashboard-selfsigned.key;
    
    # Frontend static files
    location / {
        root /opt/dashboard/dist;
        try_files \$uri \$uri/ /index.html;

        # Add cache control for static assets
        location /assets {
            expires 7d;
            add_header Cache-Control "public, max-age=604800";
        }
    }

    # Backend API
    location /api {
        proxy_pass http://localhost:5000;
        proxy_set_header Host \$host;
        proxy_set_header X-Real-IP \$remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For \$proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
        proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto \$scheme;
        proxy_read_timeout 90;
    }
}
EOF

# Replace "your-server-ip" with your actual server IP in the Nginx config
sudo sed -i "s/your-server-ip/$(curl -s ifconfig.me)/g" /etc/nginx/sites-available/dashboard.conf

sudo ln -sf /etc/nginx/sites-available/dashboard.conf /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/
sudo rm -f /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/default
sudo nginx -t
sudo systemctl restart nginx
```

### 7. Create Systemd Service

```bash
# First find the exact path to gunicorn in the Poetry environment
cd /opt/dashboard/backend
GUNICORN_PATH=$(sudo poetry env info --path)
echo "Poetry virtualenv path: $GUNICORN_PATH"

# Create the systemd service file with the FULL PATH to gunicorn
sudo tee /etc/systemd/system/dashboard-backend.service > /dev/null << EOF
[Unit]
Description=Tree Risk Pro Dashboard Backend
After=network.target

[Service]
User=root
WorkingDirectory=/opt/dashboard/backend
ExecStart=$GUNICORN_PATH/bin/gunicorn -w 4 -b 127.0.0.1:5000 app:app
Environment="DASHBOARD_USERNAME=TestAdmin"
Environment="DASHBOARD_PASSWORD=trp345!"
Environment="APP_MODE=production" 
Environment="GEMINI_API_KEY=$(grep GEMINI_API_KEY /opt/dashboard/backend/.env | cut -d= -f2)"
Environment="GEMINI_MODEL=$(grep GEMINI_MODEL /opt/dashboard/backend/.env | cut -d= -f2)"
Restart=always

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
EOF

sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl restart dashboard-backend
```

### 8. Verify Deployment

```bash
# Check backend status
sudo systemctl status dashboard-backend

# Verify API is running
curl -u TestAdmin:trp345! http://localhost:5000/api/config

# Verify the HTTPS site is working (ignore self-signed certificate warning)
curl https://$(curl -s ifconfig.me)/api/config -k
```

After completing these steps, your Tree Risk Pro Dashboard should be accessible via HTTPS at your server's IP address.

## Troubleshooting

### CORS or API Connection Issues

If you see CORS errors or API connection problems:

1. **Check your API_BASE_URL in the frontend**:
   
   The key issue with this deployment is ensuring the frontend doesn't try to connect directly to `http://localhost:5000`. 
   
   In the source code:
   ```javascript
   // src/services/api/apiService.js
   const API_BASE_URL = import.meta.env.VITE_API_URL || 'http://localhost:5000';
   ```

   This is why we set `VITE_API_URL=` (empty string) in the .env file. When built with an empty string, API calls become relative paths (e.g., `/api/config`) that work correctly with the Nginx proxy.

2. **Verify built JavaScript doesn't contain localhost references**:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/dashboard/dist
   grep -r "localhost:5000" --include="*.js" .
   ```

3. **Check browser console for the actual URL being used**:
   - If you see `API_BASE_URL: http://localhost:5000`, the frontend was built with the wrong environment settings
   - If you see `API_BASE_URL: /api/api`, there's a path duplication issue

4. **Check Nginx logs for proxy errors**:
   ```bash
   sudo tail -f /var/log/nginx/error.log
   ```

### Backend Service Issues

If the backend service fails to start:

1. **Poetry path issues**:
   - Find the correct path to the virtualenv: `sudo poetry env info --path`
   - Use the exact path to gunicorn in the systemd service file

2. **Missing Gemini API configuration**:
   - Confirm config.py has been updated with Gemini environment variables
   - Check backend logs: `sudo journalctl -u dashboard-backend -e`

3. **Run backend manually to debug**:
   ```bash
   cd /opt/dashboard/backend
   sudo poetry run python app.py
   ```

### Missing Google Maps Components

If you see the error: "The map is initialized without a valid Map ID, which will prevent use of Advanced Markers":

1. **Get a valid Map ID from Google Cloud Console**:
   - Go to the [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)
   - Navigate to Google Maps Platform > Map Management
   - Create a new Map ID or use an existing one

2. **Make sure .env contains the correct Map ID**:
   ```
   VITE_GOOGLE_MAPS_MAP_ID=your_map_id
   ```

3. **Rebuild the frontend** after updating the environment variables

## Service Management for v0.2.0

### Monitoring Logs

```bash
# Backend Flask logs
sudo journalctl -u dashboard-backend.service -f
tail -f /opt/dashboard/backend/logs/app.log

# Tree detection logs (job-specific)
ls -la /opt/dashboard/backend/logs/tree_detection_*
cat /opt/dashboard/backend/logs/tree_detection_<timestamp>.log

# Nginx logs
sudo tail -f /var/log/nginx/access.log
sudo tail -f /var/log/nginx/error.log
```

### Managing Services

```bash
# Backend service management
sudo systemctl status dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl restart dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl stop dashboard-backend
sudo systemctl start dashboard-backend

# Nginx service management
sudo systemctl status nginx
sudo systemctl restart nginx

# Check current CPU and memory usage
top -u $(whoami)

# Monitor disk space
df -h /opt/dashboard
```

### Backup and Restore

```bash
# Backup the entire application
sudo tar -czf /tmp/dashboard-backup-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz /opt/dashboard

# Backup just the data directories
sudo tar -czf /tmp/dashboard-data-$(date +%Y%m%d).tar.gz /opt/dashboard/backend/data

# Restore from backup
sudo tar -xzf /tmp/dashboard-backup-20250426.tar.gz -C /
sudo systemctl restart dashboard-backend
```

## Security Checklist

1. **Authentication**:
   - Update the default credentials after deployment
   - Use a strong password (12+ characters with mixed case, numbers, symbols)
   - Current auth implementation is suitable for beta testing

2. **SSL/TLS**:
   - Our deployment script sets up a self-signed certificate by default
   - Current setup on 34.125.120.78 uses this self-signed certificate
   - For domain-based deployment, use Let's Encrypt:
     ```bash
     sudo systemctl status certbot.timer  # Check auto-renewal status
     ```

3. **Firewall**:
   - Our server has these ports open:
     ```bash
     sudo ufw status  # Should show only 22, 80, 443
     ```

4. **Updates**:
   - Update system packages monthly:
     ```bash
     sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade -y
     ```
   - Check for outdated dependencies:
     ```bash
     cd /opt/dashboard && npm outdated
     cd /opt/dashboard/backend && source venv/bin/activate && pip list --outdated
     ```

5. **API Security**:
   - Keep API keys secure
   - Our Gemini API key is restricted to the production VM
   - Do not commit credentials to git

6. **Gemini API Usage**:
   - Monitor usage at https://console.cloud.google.com
   - Current quota: 60 requests/minute
   - Current billing: Pay-as-you-go with monthly budget alert
